README.md, before:

Brando
======

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/chrisdinn/brando.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/chrisdinn/brando)

A lightweight Redis client for use with [Akka](http://akka.io).

## Using

In your build.sbt

    resolvers += "chrisdinn" at "http://chrisdinn.github.io/releases/"

    libraryDependencies += "com.digital-achiever" %% "brando" % "3.0.2"

### Getting started

Brando is a lightweight wrapper around the [Redis protocol](http://redis.io/topics/protocol).

Create a Redis actor with your server host and port. 

      import brando._

      val redis = system.actorOf(Redis("localhost", 6379))

You should specify a database and password if you intend to use them. 

      val redis = system.actorOf(Redis("localhost", 6379, database = 5, auth = "password"))

This is important; if your Redis actor restarts you want be sure it reconnects successfully and to the same database.

Next, send it a command and get your response as a reply.

      redis ! Request("PING")

      // Response: Some(Pong)

The Redis protocol supports 5 standard types of reply: Status, Error, Integer, Bulk and Multi Bulk as well as a special NULL Bulk/Multi Bulk reply. 

Status replies are returned as case objects, such as `Pong` and `Ok`.

      redis ! Request("SET", "some-key", "this-value")

      // Response: Some(Ok)

Error replies are returned as `akka.actor.Status.Failure` objects containing an an exception with server's response as its message.

      redis ! Request("EXPIRE", "1", "key")
	  
	  // Response: Failure(brando.RedisException: ERR value is not an integer or out of range)

Integer replies are returned as `Option[Long]`. 

      redis ! Request("SADD", "some-set", "one", "two")

      // Response: Some(2)

Bulk replies as `Option[akka.util.ByteString]`.

      redis ! Request("GET", "some-key")

      // Response: Some(ByteString("this-value"))

Multi Bulk replies as `Option[List[Option[ByteString]]]`.

      redis ! Request("SMEMBERS", "some-set")

      // Response: Some(List(Some(ByteString("one")), Some(ByteString("two"))))

NULL replies are returned as `None` and may appear either on their own or nested inside a Multi Bulk reply.

      redis ! Request("GET", "non-existent-key")

      // Response: None

If you're not sure what to expect in response to a request, please refer to the Redis command documentation at [http://redis.io/commands](http://redis.io/commands) where the reply type for each is clearly stated.

To ensure that a list of requests are executed back to back, the Redis actor can receive the following message : 

	redis ! Batch(Request("MULTI"), Request("SET", "mykey", "somevalue"), Request("GET", "mykey"), Request("EXEC"))
	
	// Response : List(Some(Ok), Some(Queued), Some(Queued), Some("somevalue"))

This is very usefull in that case since it'll make sure no other requests are executed between the MULTI and EXEC commands.
Responses will also be grouped in a single list of the same size as the Batch requests.

### Response extractors

Use the provided response extractors to map your Redis reply to a more appropriate Scala type.

      for{ Response.AsString(value) ← redis ? Request("GET", "key") } yield value
      
      //value: String
      
      for{ Response.AsStrings(values) ← redis ? Request("KEYS", "*") } yield values
      
      //values: Seq[String]
      
      for{ Response.AsByteSeqs(value) ← redis ? Request("GET", "key") } yield value
      
      //value: Seq[Byte]
      
      for{ Response.AsStringsHash(fields) ← redis ? Request("HGETALL", "hash-key") } yield fields
      
      //fields: Map[String,String]
      
### Monitoring Connection State Changes

If a set of listeners is provided to the Redis actor when it is created , it will inform the those listeners about state changes to the underlying Redis connection. For example (from inside an actor):

      val redis = context.actorOf(Redis("localhost", 6379, listeners = Set(self)))

Currently, the possible messages sent to each listener include the following:

 * `Connecting`: When creating a TCP connection.
 * `Connected`: When a TCP connection has been created, and Authentication (if applicable) has succeeded.
 * `Disconnected`: The connection has been lost. Redis transparently handles disconnects and will automatically reconnect, so typically no user action at all is needed here. During the time that Redis is disconnected, Redis commands sent will be queued be processed once the connection is reestablished.
 * `AuthenticationFailed`: The TCP connected was made, but Redis auth failed.
 * `ConnectionFailed`:  A connection could not be established after the number of attempts defined during creation `connectionRetryAttempts`. Brando will not attempt to recover from this state; the user should take action.

All these messages inherit from the `Connection.StateChange` trait.


### Sentinel

#### Sentinel Client

Sentinel provides support for `monitoring`, `notification` and `automatic failover` using [sentinel](http://redis.io/topics/sentinel). It is implemented based on the following [guidelines](http://redis.io/topics/sentinel-clients) and requires redis 2.8.12 or later.

A sentinel client can be created like this. Here, we are using two servers and we provide a listener to receive  `Connection.StateChange` events.

	val sentinel = system.actorOf(Sentinel(Seq(
          Server("localhost", 26380),
          Server("localhost", 26379)), Set(probe.ref)))

You can listen for events using the following:

	sentinel ! Request("SENTINEL","SUBSCRIBE", "failover-end")

You can also send commands such as

	sentinel ! Request("SENTINEL", "MASTERS")


#### Redis with Sentinel

Redis can be used with Sentinel to provide automatic failover and discovery. To do so you need to create a `Sentinel` and a `RedisSentinel` actor. In this example we are connecting to the master `mymaster` 

		val sentinel = system.actorOf(Sentinel(Seq(
          Server("localhost", 26380),
          Server("localhost", 26379))))

        val redis = system.actorOf(RedisSentinel("mymaster", sentinel))

	    redis ! Request("PING")

For reliability we encourage to pass `connectionHeartbeatDelay` when using RedisSentinel, this will generate a heartbeat to Redis and will improve failures detections in the case of network partitions.

### Sharding

Brando provides support for sharding, as outlined [in the Redis documentation](http://redis.io/topics/partitioning) and in [this blog post from antirez](http://oldblog.antirez.com/post/redis-presharding.html).

To use it, simply create an instance of `ShardManager`, passing it a list of Redis shards you'd like it to connect to. From there, we create a pool of `Redis` instances - one for each shard.

	val shards = Seq(RedisShard("redis1", "10.0.0.1", 6379),
					 RedisShard("redis2", "10.0.0.2", 6379),
					 RedisShard("redis3", "10.0.0.3", 6379))

	val shardManager = context.actorOf(ShardManager(shards))

Once an instance of `ShardManager` has been created, it can be sent several types of messages:

* `Request` objects for inferring the shard key from the params
* `Tuple2[String, Request]` objects for specifying the shard key explicitly
* `ShardBroadcast` objects for broadcasting requests to all shards

Here are some examples,

	shardManager ! Request("SET", "mykey", "some_value")
	shardManager ! ("myshardkey", Request("SET", "mykey", "some_value"))
	shardManager ! BroadcastRequest("LPOP", "mylistkey") // don't use the ask pattern

Note that the `ShardManager` explicitly requires a key for all operations except for the `BroadcastRequest`. This is because the key is used to determined which shard each request should be forwarded to. In this context, operations which operate on multiple keys (e.g. `MSET`, `MGET`) or no keys at all (e.g. `SELECT`, `FLUSHDB`) should be avoided, as they break the Redis sharding model. Also note that the `BroadcastRequest` must not be used with the `ask` pattern in Akka or responses will be lost!

Individual shards can have their configuration updated on the fly. To do this, send a `Shard` message to `ShardManager`.

	shardManager ! RedisShard("redis1", "10.0.0.4", 6379)


val shardManager = context.actorOf(ShardManager(shards, listeners = Set(self)))

The `ShardManager` will forward all `Connection.StateChange` messages when a shard changes state.


#### Sharding with sentinel

It's possible to use sharding with Sentinel, to do so you need to use `SentinelShard` instead of `RedisShard`

        val shards = Seq(
          SentinelShard("mymaster1"),
          SentinelShard("mymaster2"))

        val sentinel = system.actorOf(Sentinel()) //defaults host and port are localhost:26379

        val shardManager = context.actorOf(ShardManager(shards,sentinel))

## Run the tests

* Start sentinel
    
        sudo redis-sentinel redis-config/sentinel.conf --sentinel

* Start a Redis master and slave 

        sudo redis-server test-config/redis.conf --loglevel verbose
  		sudo mkdir /var/lib/redis-slave
        sudo redis-server test-config/redis-slave.conf --loglevel verbose

* Run the tests 

        sbt test


## Documentation

Read the API documentation here: [http://chrisdinn.github.io/api/brando-3.0.2/](http://chrisdinn.github.io/api/brando-3.0.2/)

## Mailing list

Send questions, comments or discussion topics to the mailing list brando@librelist.com.

## License

This project is released under the Apache License v2, for more details see the 'LICENSE' file.

## Contributing

Fork the project, add tests if possible and send a pull request.

## Contributors

Chris Dinn, Jason Goodwin, Tyson Hamilton, Gaetan Hervouet, Damien Levin, Matt MacAulay, Arron Norwell

## Changelog

### v3.x.x

Brando no longer implements `akka.actor.Stash`. In consequence, all incoming requests throw
a `RedisDisconnectedException` if the `Connection` is not established. This version delegates the
responsibility to the sender, it is no longer handled by the Brando itself. In older versions, when
the connection was not established, the requests were stashed. When established, all stashed
requests were unstashed and processed.

Commit message:

#60 Stashing redis actor - when the connection is not established, it stashes requests   and unstashes them when the connection gets established

README.md, after:

Brando
======

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/chrisdinn/brando.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/chrisdinn/brando)

A lightweight Redis client for use with [Akka](http://akka.io).

## Using

In your build.sbt

    resolvers += "chrisdinn" at "http://chrisdinn.github.io/releases/"

    libraryDependencies += "com.digital-achiever" %% "brando" % "3.0.2"

### Getting started

Brando is a lightweight wrapper around the [Redis protocol](http://redis.io/topics/protocol).

Create a Redis actor with your server host and port. 

      import brando._

      val redis = system.actorOf(Redis("localhost", 6379))

You should specify a database and password if you intend to use them. 

      val redis = system.actorOf(Redis("localhost", 6379, database = 5, auth = "password"))

This is important; if your Redis actor restarts you want be sure it reconnects successfully and to the same database.

Next, send it a command and get your response as a reply.

      redis ! Request("PING")

      // Response: Some(Pong)

The Redis protocol supports 5 standard types of reply: Status, Error, Integer, Bulk and Multi Bulk as well as a special NULL Bulk/Multi Bulk reply. 

Status replies are returned as case objects, such as `Pong` and `Ok`.

      redis ! Request("SET", "some-key", "this-value")

      // Response: Some(Ok)

Error replies are returned as `akka.actor.Status.Failure` objects containing an an exception with server's response as its message.

      redis ! Request("EXPIRE", "1", "key")
	  
	  // Response: Failure(brando.RedisException: ERR value is not an integer or out of range)

Integer replies are returned as `Option[Long]`. 

      redis ! Request("SADD", "some-set", "one", "two")

      // Response: Some(2)

Bulk replies as `Option[akka.util.ByteString]`.

      redis ! Request("GET", "some-key")

      // Response: Some(ByteString("this-value"))

Multi Bulk replies as `Option[List[Option[ByteString]]]`.

      redis ! Request("SMEMBERS", "some-set")

      // Response: Some(List(Some(ByteString("one")), Some(ByteString("two"))))

NULL replies are returned as `None` and may appear either on their own or nested inside a Multi Bulk reply.

      redis ! Request("GET", "non-existent-key")

      // Response: None

If you're not sure what to expect in response to a request, please refer to the Redis command documentation at [http://redis.io/commands](http://redis.io/commands) where the reply type for each is clearly stated.

To ensure that a list of requests are executed back to back, the Redis actor can receive the following message : 

	redis ! Batch(Request("MULTI"), Request("SET", "mykey", "somevalue"), Request("GET", "mykey"), Request("EXEC"))
	
	// Response : List(Some(Ok), Some(Queued), Some(Queued), Some("somevalue"))

This is very usefull in that case since it'll make sure no other requests are executed between the MULTI and EXEC commands.
Responses will also be grouped in a single list of the same size as the Batch requests.

### Response extractors

Use the provided response extractors to map your Redis reply to a more appropriate Scala type.

      for{ Response.AsString(value) ← redis ? Request("GET", "key") } yield value
      
      //value: String
      
      for{ Response.AsStrings(values) ← redis ? Request("KEYS", "*") } yield values
      
      //values: Seq[String]
      
      for{ Response.AsByteSeqs(value) ← redis ? Request("GET", "key") } yield value
      
      //value: Seq[Byte]
      
      for{ Response.AsStringsHash(fields) ← redis ? Request("HGETALL", "hash-key") } yield fields
      
      //fields: Map[String,String]
      
### Monitoring Connection State Changes

If a set of listeners is provided to the Redis actor when it is created , it will inform the those listeners about state changes to the underlying Redis connection. For example (from inside an actor):

      val redis = context.actorOf(Redis("localhost", 6379, listeners = Set(self)))

Currently, the possible messages sent to each listener include the following:

 * `Connecting`: When creating a TCP connection.
 * `Connected`: When a TCP connection has been created, and Authentication (if applicable) has succeeded.
 * `Disconnected`: The connection has been lost. Redis transparently handles disconnects and will automatically reconnect, so typically no user action at all is needed here. During the time that Redis is disconnected, Redis commands sent will be queued be processed once the connection is reestablished.
 * `AuthenticationFailed`: The TCP connected was made, but Redis auth failed.
 * `ConnectionFailed`:  A connection could not be established after the number of attempts defined during creation `connectionRetryAttempts`. Brando will not attempt to recover from this state; the user should take action.

All these messages inherit from the `Connection.StateChange` trait.

### Requests stashing when connection is not established

Current Brando implementation throws an exception when the connection is not established and 
it receives a request. However, sometimes you do not need the answer right now and you can wait
a bit before the connection gets established. The `StashingRedis` actor provides this functionality,
it is designed as a proxy to be used. When it receives requests while the connection is not established,
it stashes them. Once the connection gets established, it unstashes them and passed them to the actual
`Redis` actor. When the connection is established, all incoming requests are passed right through.

This was the built-in behavior of Brando 2.x.x


      // create the Redis actor
      val brando = system.actorOf(Redis(listeners = Set(self)))
      // create the stashing proxy
      val proxy = system.actorOf(StashingRedis(brando))
      // query the proxy
      proxy ? Request("PING")



### Sentinel

#### Sentinel Client

Sentinel provides support for `monitoring`, `notification` and `automatic failover` using [sentinel](http://redis.io/topics/sentinel). It is implemented based on the following [guidelines](http://redis.io/topics/sentinel-clients) and requires redis 2.8.12 or later.

A sentinel client can be created like this. Here, we are using two servers and we provide a listener to receive  `Connection.StateChange` events.

	val sentinel = system.actorOf(Sentinel(Seq(
          Server("localhost", 26380),
          Server("localhost", 26379)), Set(probe.ref)))

You can listen for events using the following:

	sentinel ! Request("SENTINEL","SUBSCRIBE", "failover-end")

You can also send commands such as

	sentinel ! Request("SENTINEL", "MASTERS")


#### Redis with Sentinel

Redis can be used with Sentinel to provide automatic failover and discovery. To do so you need to create a `Sentinel` and a `RedisSentinel` actor. In this example we are connecting to the master `mymaster` 

		val sentinel = system.actorOf(Sentinel(Seq(
          Server("localhost", 26380),
          Server("localhost", 26379))))

        val redis = system.actorOf(RedisSentinel("mymaster", sentinel))

	    redis ! Request("PING")

For reliability we encourage to pass `connectionHeartbeatDelay` when using RedisSentinel, this will generate a heartbeat to Redis and will improve failures detections in the case of network partitions.

### Sharding

Brando provides support for sharding, as outlined [in the Redis documentation](http://redis.io/topics/partitioning) and in [this blog post from antirez](http://oldblog.antirez.com/post/redis-presharding.html).

To use it, simply create an instance of `ShardManager`, passing it a list of Redis shards you'd like it to connect to. From there, we create a pool of `Redis` instances - one for each shard.

	val shards = Seq(RedisShard("redis1", "10.0.0.1", 6379),
					 RedisShard("redis2", "10.0.0.2", 6379),
					 RedisShard("redis3", "10.0.0.3", 6379))

	val shardManager = context.actorOf(ShardManager(shards))

Once an instance of `ShardManager` has been created, it can be sent several types of messages:

* `Request` objects for inferring the shard key from the params
* `Tuple2[String, Request]` objects for specifying the shard key explicitly
* `ShardBroadcast` objects for broadcasting requests to all shards

Here are some examples,

	shardManager ! Request("SET", "mykey", "some_value")
	shardManager ! ("myshardkey", Request("SET", "mykey", "some_value"))
	shardManager ! BroadcastRequest("LPOP", "mylistkey") // don't use the ask pattern

Note that the `ShardManager` explicitly requires a key for all operations except for the `BroadcastRequest`. This is because the key is used to determined which shard each request should be forwarded to. In this context, operations which operate on multiple keys (e.g. `MSET`, `MGET`) or no keys at all (e.g. `SELECT`, `FLUSHDB`) should be avoided, as they break the Redis sharding model. Also note that the `BroadcastRequest` must not be used with the `ask` pattern in Akka or responses will be lost!

Individual shards can have their configuration updated on the fly. To do this, send a `Shard` message to `ShardManager`.

	shardManager ! RedisShard("redis1", "10.0.0.4", 6379)


val shardManager = context.actorOf(ShardManager(shards, listeners = Set(self)))

The `ShardManager` will forward all `Connection.StateChange` messages when a shard changes state.


#### Sharding with sentinel

It's possible to use sharding with Sentinel, to do so you need to use `SentinelShard` instead of `RedisShard`

        val shards = Seq(
          SentinelShard("mymaster1"),
          SentinelShard("mymaster2"))

        val sentinel = system.actorOf(Sentinel()) //defaults host and port are localhost:26379

        val shardManager = context.actorOf(ShardManager(shards,sentinel))

## Run the tests

* Start sentinel
    
        sudo redis-sentinel redis-config/sentinel.conf --sentinel

* Start a Redis master and slave 

        sudo redis-server test-config/redis.conf --loglevel verbose
  		sudo mkdir /var/lib/redis-slave
        sudo redis-server test-config/redis-slave.conf --loglevel verbose

* Run the tests 

        sbt test


## Documentation

Read the API documentation here: [http://chrisdinn.github.io/api/brando-3.0.2/](http://chrisdinn.github.io/api/brando-3.0.2/)

## Mailing list

Send questions, comments or discussion topics to the mailing list brando@librelist.com.

## License

This project is released under the Apache License v2, for more details see the 'LICENSE' file.

## Contributing

Fork the project, add tests if possible and send a pull request.

## Contributors

Chris Dinn, Jason Goodwin, Tyson Hamilton, Gaetan Hervouet, Damien Levin, Matt MacAulay, Arron Norwell

## Changelog

### v3.x.x

Brando no longer implements `akka.actor.Stash`. In consequence, all incoming requests throw
a `RedisDisconnectedException` if the `Connection` is not established. This version delegates the
responsibility to the sender, it is no longer handled by the Brando itself. In older versions, when
the connection was not established, the requests were stashed. When established, all stashed
requests were unstashed and processed. For smoother migration, there is `StashingRedis` providing
the same behavior. For more details see *Requests stashing when connection is not established*
